So let's talk about serverless functions.
So I am Jason Lengstorf.
I am @jlengstorf on pretty
much every social platform.
You're gonna find me anywhere, if you
wanna learn more about me I'm @jason.af.
I work as a principal developer
experience engineer at Netlify.
Prior to that I worked at Gatsby,
before that I worked at IBM.
And before that I did agency work for
years and years and years.
And what I wanna talk about today is
Serverless, and the reason that I
think serverless is exciting is that
I've been doing this for a long time.
I started working in PHP, and
I was building backends in PHP.
And there's this kind of like
when you work on any website,
you've got a few layers
that you're dealing with.
You've got the piece that your
users are actually gonna see,
it's the the markup,
the things that go to the browser.
Then underneath that you've got another
layer where the pieces that will go to
the browser,
they have to get data somewhere, so
they have a way that they communicate
some layer that they communicate to.
Then you've got your
kind of business logic.
And that's where you actually do things,
you're gonna take a list of data and
you're gonna turn that into,
you're gonna reformat that as a chart,
you're gonna sort things so that users are
getting just what they're supposed to see
and not everybody else's data.
And underneath that, you've got your data.
And depending on how you organize this
you end up with a lot of different
architectures, one of the most common ones
for a long time ago was go monolithic,
and that's still common today.
Where everything is in one big app,
you've got your data is connected by your
business logic is is put through some kind
of a communication layer to the generated
markup that goes to the client and
that all lives in the same code base.
That can be great,
it is a great way to get started.
It's a great way to limit the amount
of complexity in the setup and
deployment of your app.
But over time as your team grows, as
the app grows, as the complexity of what
you're building grows, that starts to
become really challenging to manage.
Because you've got a lot of people
trying to work in the same codebase or
your codebase starts to grow tendrils,
where you can't change something over here
because it might break
something over here.
And then that's pretty challenging.
So then the the next phase
is you start doing a,
like a vertical separation where
you've got micro services.
So maybe you've got an account micro
service, maybe you've got a dashboard
micro service,
maybe you've got a billing micro service.
And each of those can be, it's a mini
monolith, you've got the the front end
the the communication layer, the data, the
business logic all in a little container.
But now it's doing much less work.
And that is great because now
teams can work individually on
the things that they're working on.
And it prevents that cross tendril
where you've got things that are kind
of reaching across.
If you wanna change
something in the account,
it'll break your dashboard or
something, and that's good.
So you're creating additional separation.
The challenge then becomes,
you've got this vertical
integration that's really tight and
that can be, it just gets tricky, right?
Because now you've got like a front
end team that needs to do something.
And maybe their back end doesn't
do exactly what they need.
So they might write a proxy layer or
something and then you've got
these kind of weird communications where
things are, they just get muddy again.
It's hard to tell where
the front end ends and
the back end begins because in the middle,
there's this muddy kind of mess.
So then you start looking at like, well,
okay, how do we start separating this way?
How do we separate front
end from back end?
And it starts to lead to an architecture
that I'm very fond of called
the Jam Stack.
Where you look at your front
end as a separate thing,
your front end is a generated artifact
that's separate from this the services.
So a micro service instead of generating
a front end starts to generate an API.
It gives you an API surface
that you can speak to.
And if you haven't used
this professionally,
you've almost certainly used
it in Software as a Service.
If you've ever worked with
something like Stripe.
Or if you've ever worked with any
sort of like any content management
system that you use an API to get
the data if you've used strappy or
contentful, or
if you've worked with GraphQL.
Or if you've worked with any of these API
layers where you're gonna say, all right,
service, I would like this data, and
then you get back an object and you do
something with it and show it on screen.
That's the separation from
the front end to the back end.
And if you're using this
Jam Stack architecture,
you can pull all of that
once at build time.
And then you end up with these set
artifacts that just sit in one place.
They're pre-generated,
which means they're very fast.
And you don't have to have a server
to run your front end anymore,
which is a really,
really nice thing to do.
It gets you into this world where
your front ends are no longer
dependent on a running server,
they're pre-generated.
And because they're pre-generated,
they're just static files,
each build of your site each
version of your site is a folder.
And you can drop that
folder on an FTP server,
you can drop that folder onto a CDN, which
is usually going to be your best bet.
And then you can shut down the servers,
you can shut down all the services and
things just work.
However, as you might already be thinking,
that leaves this gap where in any website,
there are a lot of things, a huge amount
of things that can just be generated once.
The skeletons for
most of your app pages are gonna look
the same no matter who's looking at them.
Your marketing pages,
the announcements, the blog,
the pricing pages, all of these parts
of your app Don't really change,
they change infrequently, and
they look the same for almost everybody.
So then you've got this small amount of
data that's gonna change for each user.
When they log in,
they're gonna see different things.
Or when somebody clicks a button,
they need to see something happen.
If somebody submits a form,
it needs to go somewhere.
When you get into the Jam Stack, it can
be easy to say, well, you can't do that,
that doesn't work, and so we need servers.
Fortunately, that's not the case,
we are actually able to do so
much using serverless functions that you
would traditionally have to go back and
get a server for it.
And so that is a really, really exciting
opportunity for us because it means that
as front end developers, if we wanna
build really dynamic experiences, or
if we wanna empower our teams
to build really robust apps,
without requiring them to scale out with
a big DevOps team, a big back end team.
We just want them to be able to
build an amazing app experience and
then make it dynamic Serverless
functions give us that key
because we're able to
just write some logic.
And that logic is what executes and
it works very similar to an API.
We're gonna look at real
examples here in a minute.
But that logic allows you to
say when someone clicks a form,
I wanna take the form input,
I want to do some validation on it,
and then I wanna send it somewhere.
And I don't have to say, my server
is here, I have this route set up,
I need this proxy configured,
I need this gateway configured.
We just get to say, here's a function.
And so that makes life really easy,
it makes it much nicer to
get things up and running.
And these are really robust,
you can use these at any scale, right?
Serverless functions, they're available
in every major cloud provider,
you can use them in AWS, you can use
them in Google, in Azure, IBM Cloud,
whatever you're into,
you can use serverless functions with it.
And there's gonna be
an offering to support that.
But what I like about it is that it
doesn't have the same barrier to entry
that similar approaches or
similar ways to solve similar problems.
If you wanted to do this with
a monolithic application,
you might find yourself trying
to deal with the database,
trying to deal with caching layer in front
of that database, something like Red is.
You would have to set up your proxy,
you'd have to set up all these these extra
things you're getting into the Apache or
the NginX configuration.
You're getting into so
many things that just get muddy, and
it's not the thing that you wanna be
dealing with because what you're trying to
do is solve a problem.
You're not trying to architect a robust
solution, you want the solution to be
robust so you can just solve
the thing that you care about.
So how do server list functions work?
The way that a server list function
works is that it doesn't mean
that you're getting rid of servers.
What it means is that the logic
that you're deploying,
where you used to have to
deal with the whole thing.
Now, you get to leave almost all of
the configuration part this huge chunk of
setup and boilerplate and configuration,
that's now handled by a third party.
You are saying, hey, AWS,
I'm gonna use lambda.
I just wanna send you some business logic.
You deal with all the scaling and
and configuration and routing, and
they'll just do that for you.
Depending on which solution you use,
there's gonna be more or
less setup there,
usually YAML configuration or something.
But in general,
what you're saying is I need a server, but
I don't wanna deal with a server.
And serverless function
are a way to do that.
I want to just write server-style logic
and not deal with any of the deployment or
configuration or management of a server.
So serverless doesn't mean no servers,
it means somebody else
deals with the servers.
And I think that's probably the most
important point to take away from this,
like serverless isn't magic,
it's still a server.
And that's actually the exciting part,
because it's still a server,
just a server that you
don't have to manage.
We get all of the benefits of running
a server without the headaches and
overhead of managing servers.
And I think that is
the most exciting thing.
That's the part that gives
us the most flexibility,
it's what lets us move extremely fast.